---
layout: home
author_profile: true
header:
  image: /assets/images/sandiegocopy.jpeg
  image_description: "san diego"
title: About this website
---

Hello! As you probably already figured out, My name is Javier Ponce, and I made this website for anyone interested in learning more about who I am and the things that I find fascinating about life. Hopefully, you are reading this because you are a prospective friend or an interested Employer, and ideally, you are both.

# About Me

I consider myself a creative, passionate, and curious mind fascinated by Mathematics and how to understand random processes with mathematical modeling. I am pursuing my passion for Mathematics at the University of California San Diego, where I am working towards completing a degree with a Probability and Statistics major, an Economics major, and a Data Science minor. 

While I enjoy learning about abstract Mathematics, my creative mind impels me to merge what I observe with the mathematical principles I know. The other day, after spending a lot of time with my dog Leia, I noticed that she has four moods: resting, eating, playing, and going outside (equivalent to going to the restroom). Since I wish to predict when Leia might want to go outside, I wondered if I could define a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_stochastic_process" target="_blank"> continous-time stochastic process</a> that accurately describes Leia's behavior and use it to predict if Leia wants to go outside at any given time of the day. Hopefully, you can see that I enjoy formulating and solving questions that merge my reality with Mathematics, which pushes me to use my education and experience to seek a living out of it. 

## My work experience

Since September 2023, I've been working for the Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute as a Data Science tutor and for the University of California San Diego Academic Achievement Hub as a Content tutor. I am fortunate enough to say that I enjoy both jobs and that both positions allowed me to improve my professional and personal skills in different ways.

### Data Science tutor 

As a Data Science tutor, I work with a group of 8 to 10 other tutors supervised by a University of California San Diego Data Science course instructor to enhance the experience of the undergraduates taking the respective course. Each quarter, the course instructors select the group of tutors they'll be working with, creating a competitive application process where you are not guaranteed to return for the following quarters. Thankfully, I've been selected for the last three quarters to tutor for the "Theoretical Foundations of Data Science I" course at UCSD.

Tutoring for the "Theoretical Foundations of Data Science I" course at UCSD **allowed me to understand the theory behind very relevant Data Science topics at a higher level**. In the current state of the world, the computational capabilities of humans become obsolete when trying to compete with the modern computers accessible to most of us; my laptop can compute the solution vector of a multiple linear regression problem in an instant, while it would take me several minutes (or hours depending on the size of data) to do the same. Under these circumstances, it is the ability to understand how to tackle real-life questions with our theoretical knowledge that becomes valuable. Over the last three quarters, I've been building this type of understanding by creating, solving, explaining, and studying problems related to empirical risk minimization, optimization, multiple linear regression, feature engineering, classification, and probability theory, all topics covered in the course.

As I mentioned, humans can't compete with the computational power of modern computers, making it necessary to pair our theoretical knowledge with a strong understanding of different coding languages and packages. Through the Data Science tutor position, **I've developed a stronger sense of familiarization with tools like Python (specially the pandas and numpy libraries), git, GitHub, HTML, LaTeX, Jupyter notebooks, YAML, and Markdown**. Even though I tutor for a course that focuses on the theoretical principles behind data science, we understand that the role of a data scientist involves a lot of coding, so throughout the quarter, we add several assignments where students will solve mathematical problems using Python. As data science tutors, one of our tasks is assignment development and grading. Both grading and developing such assignments allowed me to improve my expertise in utilizing Python to solve optimization, multiple linear regression, and classification problems.

In addition to practicing Python, the Data Science tutor position allows me to **practice working on collaborative coding projects with others**. At the time I'm writing this, I am currently working with two other tutors to develop a website that functions as an archive of exams, allowing the current students in the course to access past exams to practice for their own. This project requires transcribing exams from LaTeX to individual Markdown files and then creating specific YAML files so that they appear on the website; using everything I learned through the projects and tasks that come with the Data Science tutor job, I've been able to build the website you are currently reading. Additionally to learning a variety of syntaxes, this project allowed me to get a taste of working on a project with multiple data scientists. I learned valuable skills like how to avoid merge conflicts, how to work in different branches on GitHub/git, how to write meaningful commit messages, etc. Overall, the Data Science tutor position prepared me to succeed in any future collaborative projects I start. 
 
### Content tutor

In my content tutor job, I give personalized support through in-person tutoring sessions where I engage with up to two students who need assistance with their UCSD Mathematics coursework. I currently tutor the material of 12 different classes from the UCSD Mathematics department, covering all the levels of college calculus, linear algebra, statistics, and probability. Working as a content tutor for over three quarters (an academic year at UCSD) allowed me to **develop an advanced understanding of college-level Mathematics**, **better communication skills**, and **improved my problem-solving strategies**.

Tutoring Mathematics helped me draw the connections between all the courses I tutor and all the courses I take as a student, allowing me to develop an advanced understanding of what Mathematics is. Now, instead of seeing different classes, I see sets of definitions and theorems that communicate with each other. This acquired perspective of Mathematics supported moving my knowledge from a short-term to a long-term memory and allowed me to strengthen my Mathematical Intuition. For example, **tutoring made me better at producing and interpreting Mathematical visualizations**, mainly because of the over-exposure to calculus problems that involved the visualization of real-valued functions, but also because of the advanced understanding of Mathematics I now have; I used to think of functions as lines or surfaces on a plane, but as I developed a better understanding of what a function is, I realized that those lines are a tool to visualize what a function does and, as Mathematicians we always have the liberty to create new visualizations that highlight specific properties of the Mathematical objects relevant to us. The practice I get from solving Mathematical problems as a tutor and the theoretical knowledge from my coursework merge, making me a better Mathematician than I could ever be without being a tutor.

## My personal interests

Although I have a strong passion for Mathematics and Data Science, I have multiple passions outside of the spectrum of my academic or professional careers, and I wouldn't be myself without them. I am a person who enjoys activities that push me to think deeply while also challenging my creativity by constantly provoking me to generate new ideas, which is why music, strategy games, and cooking are some of the most important things for my identity.
