## Did COVID make students attempting to go to college worse at math?

As a student who experienced the online classes era during COVID, I believe that online schooling significantly decreased learning among all students, especially in abstract subjects like mathematics. Similarly, during my years as a Mathematics and Data Science tutor at UCSD, I found that many students struggled due to a lack of understanding of fundamental concepts they had studied during the COVID pandemic. Driven by this belief, I started looking for relevant data to run statistical tests on.

Ideally, when you want to test a causal effect like the one I described in the above paragraph, you would seek data that allows you to hold all variables constant while changing the variable that causes the effect. Finding such data would require students who were and weren’t affected by the COVID pandemic at the same time, which is impossible without access to a parallel reality where COVID didn’t happen. Instead, we can compare how students performed during math tests before and after the pandemic. While such a comparison won't prove causality, if we don’t find any statistically significant change in performance, then it doesn’t make sense to hold a belief that is not somehow reflected in our reality. Thus, I decided to run statistical tests on data from the SAT yearly reports from 2020 to 2025. 

## The parameters of interest and the Data.

Before running any tests, let me define the parameters of interest and explain how we can use the data from the yearly SAT reports to test the defined parameters. I’ll define $\mu_x$ to be the average math SAT score obtained by high school students who want to attend college in the near future during the school cycle $x$ in the hypothetical case where all of them took the test. For simplicity, let each school cycle be represented by the latter year of each cycle, meaning that $\mu_{2025}$ represents the true average score of all students who want to attend college in the 2025-2024 cycle if we were to test all of these students. Under these definitions, we are interested in testing the hypothesis that  $\mu_x < \mu_y$, where $x$ represents a school cycle after the COVID lockdown and $y$ the one before it. 

Since not all students attempting to attend college in each school cycle take the SAT, the data from the SAT yearly reports are from a sample of our population of interest. Now, using the data from our sample, we can run statistical tests to make inferences about our parameters of interest. There’s just one problem. If you are familiar with statistics, you are probably concerned that our sample of students who took the SAT isn’t random, but instead the majority self-select to take or not take the test. Then how can I run meaningful tests on this data?

### A not-so-random sample.

A sample of self-selected individuals is likely to be biased because the participants might use specific information about themselves to decide whether or not to participate in the experiment. In Economics, adverse selection is a famous example of how self-selection can introduce biases to a group. Essentially, when studying the models of an insurance company that sells non-mandatory insurance, we conclude that individuals who purchased insurance have a higher probability of being granted the benefits of their insurance than the population. This happens because each individual has knowledge about their probability of being granted the benefits of the insurance, and they use this information before making the decision to purchase insurance. The reason I bring up this specific example is that even though self-selection caused a bias, Economic theory allows us to predict the overall effect of self-selection in that sample. Therefore, I’ll use ideas from Economics to predict the overall effect of self-selection in our sample of students who took the SAT.

Let’s think of the utility function that a student would consider before making the decision to take the SAT. Taking the SAT represents a cost; it requires money, preparation, and I think it is safe to assume that most students consider taking a test costly. On the other hand, students also gain utility after taking the SAT. In particular, we can split the gained utility into two groups: utility that depends on their score and utility that is independent of it. Then, to decide if they should take the SAT, students consider the following utility function.

$$ U(score) = B_1 + B_2(score) - C $$

Where $B_1$ is the part of your gained utility independent of your score, and $B_1$ is the dependent part. $C$ is just the utitlity lost from paying the costs.
